You guys will come back to the course in this lecture and just go talk real quickly about how do development
firms get paid.
So if you've ever contracted out with a development firm or with a freelancer this might be completely
new to you.
So there are two primary ways of development firm and also development.
Freelancers get paid.
One is price per hour and two is price per project.
Now there are other ones out there and a lot of times we end up working for things like d rates or hybrid
rates.
Those are kind of abnormal and that's not something that you're normally going to run into and it's
really not something that you're going to really worry about probably in your first year of running
a web development business.
So price per hour is exactly what you think it is.
It's when you charge per hour of labor you put into the project.
Another way of calling this is time and materials.
So instead of say estimating the project is going to just take this amount of money what you typically
end up doing is give a projection of how many hours it takes and then you'll just work on the project
and bill afterwards.
Now in a lot of cases really well-known well-established firms they charge time and materials and not
even give an estimation.
All they do is say this is our per hour rate.
And then if you engage us for this entire project and really only worry about is building after the
fact.
So after they spent 100 hours or 50 hours I'll send you a bill and then they typically will use something
like 15 or 30 to get paid.
Now the other one is price per project and basically what that means is that you take a chunk of work
or a task and you give an estimate for the entirety of that task.
So that is regardless of whether or not that task takes you 10 hours or 100 hours or 200 hours you're
going to make an estimation at the beginning you're in a state of crisis the client's going to agree
with you and then you work on it and then you get paid based off of whatever agreement you have for
when you get paid maybe you get paid up front maybe get paid at the end maybe split out over milestones.
So now there are obvious pros and cons for both of them as a development firm you're almost always going
to want to work on time and materials.
And the reason why that is is because one of the biggest headaches of running a development firm is
that your estimations are not always correct and it's almost impossible to get an estimation that's
accurate every single time.
Why are estimations hard to predict.
Well because a lot of times you just don't know everything that goes into a project and it's impossible
without spending an enormous amount of time upfront to figure out how complex each individual issue
that's included in a project is a lot of time you look at something and say oh we can do that 10 hours
once you actually get it do it research it try to actually do it you run into a bug and it ends up taking
30 hours.
This happens to quite literally every developer in the world every development firm in the world has
trouble estimating up for either time and material agreement.
The communication between you and the client it's so much easier.
All you have to say is this is how long it took me and that's really it because you've agreed to just
pay for your time and ultimately that's what every single freelancer or development for what they want
to be paid for their time.
So obviously the cons of setting up a time and materials way of getting paid or that it's harder to
be competitive with time and materials you can't really beat against other people you almost always
have a per hour rate.
And it's hard to change that per hour rate and then have them kind of believe you when you say all of
a sudden this developer is only worth $30 an hour as opposed to before when he said he's worth $50 an
hour.
The biggest condo is actually on the client side.
Clients don't generally like time and materials because they like to be able to budget upfront.
They like to know exactly what this is going to cost and they also like to know that if anything goes
wrong it falls on you that development to figure it out and keep it within budget.
There's also this kind of general anxiety about what happens if my project really gets away from us.
What happens if this project.
You said Oh I think it will be a hundred hours ends up being a thousand that could break an organizations
budget and a lot of them really aren't there every single day so they might not notice when it's about
to go outside of their budget constraints.
So on the flip side you can do price per project.
It's obviously a problem for you with the development firm because you're going to have to bid upfront
for exactly what you think it is.
You know if you're smart about it you can hedge and say this is what I think it'll be done with more
research and more information it might change.
You can say things like you know this is the range that I think it will be.
Once I actually spend more time on it than I can get more specific.
One of the biggest problems I think for development firms is that if you're giving out price per project
as you can spend a lot of time estimating that out right at the very beginning.
You know if you're doing five estimations each one could take you two or three hours.
You just sucked up two days of someone's time you end up spending 15 hours of time estimating and you
don't even know which ones are going to win.
So regardless you're going to end up wasting time and that is not what you want to do at all.
Now the obvious advantage to a project prize for you the development firm is that you can be more competitive
about it.
You can lower your price to beat out other people if you know your specialty or you're better at building
something in someone else's and you're got an inherent advantage when you give them a project cost.
You can just you know if you know it's going to take you half the time with someone else to do it because
you have expertise you have a right to use codebase before you have a project you can use pieces from
then you can outbid that person pretty effectively.
And you yourself still stay in budget now like I said before there are other ways of doing this.
Here it spread.
We use an agile methodology and we'll cover that later in the course whether or not you should use Adjt.
out.
What does that mean and how does that work for billing.
But basically what we say is we give an estimate of how many hours each chunk of work is going to cost
and then we have a price per chunk of work.
So really it's kind of like a hybrid.
We're really kind of bidding per hour but that giving you an hourly estimate and then typically what
we do is we say you know here's an hourly asset for this section and we'll cover it if it goes above
this amount.
So keep in mind though also that when you start you're probably going to have to use price per project
that is usually the pricing scheme and any development or for more freelance or use is when they're
first starting out when you don't have this ready to use client base that keeps coming back and back
for more work.
You can't be as picky so you kind of have to give them what they want especially a lot of times if you're
working with a client that's never worked with you before they're probably going to expect a price per
project estimate unless of course that came from a really warm referral or something like that in which
case they might be willing to give you the benefit of the doubt and using a price per hour so big as
takeaways here is that when you start please expect that you going to be doing probably a little mixture
of both.
If you're lucky you'll do price per hour or time and materials as we call it.
But it realistically you're going to be doing a lot of price per project estimations and that's really
what you're going to have to use to leverage your costs and your time to get the best price to get the
best projects.
Over time this will get much much more Koshy you'll start using more and more time in materials and
all of a sudden a lot of your headaches associated with Project Management and Budget Management will
pretty much go away.
OK guys we'll see you in the next section.